RHIDP-12635: Flavours for Operator (#2165)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/configure_configuring-rhdh/proc-configure-ai-assistance-for-developer-productivity.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

[id="configure-ai-assistance-for-developer-productivity_{context}"]
= Configure AI assistance for developer productivity

[role="_abstract"]
To use AI chat assistance in {product}, configure your LLM provider connection. {ls-short} is installed and enabled by default in {product} 1.10.0 and later.

.Prerequisites

* You have installed the {product} Operator 1.10.0 or later in your OpenShift cluster.
* You have an external LLM provider endpoint (OpenAI-compatible API).
* You have LLM provider API credentials (API key or authentication token).
* Your LLM provider endpoint is accessible from the OpenShift cluster network.

[NOTE]
====

> {ls-short} uses a bring-your-own-model (BYOM) architecture. You must provide your own LLM provider API endpoint and credentials.

Reviewer: @Jdubrick shouldn't there be some explanation of how the user influences the env var manipulation cited in the `llama-stack-config` ConfigMap over at https://github.com/redhat-developer/rhdh-operator/blob/main/config/profile/rhdh/default-config/flavours/lightspeed/configmap-files.yaml#L49-L74

Reviewer 2: Yeah there should be, I know @pabel-rh has https://github.com/redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh/pull/2210/changes opened for other Lightspeed docs changes, and she covers the provider setup in those changes. @pabel-rh @jmagak I am inclined to leave it up to you two on how you want to handle this so we don't duplicate?

====

.Procedure

. Configure {ls-short} components by following the installation and configuration procedure in {developer-lightspeed-book-link}#install-and-configure_interacting-with-developer-lightspeed-for-rhdh[Install and configure {ls-brand-name}].
+
Complete the following steps from that procedure:
+

> . Create the {lcs-name} ({lcs-short}) ConfigMap (`lightspeed-stack`)

Reviewer: isn't `lightspeed-stack` part of the manifest per https://github.com/redhat-developer/rhdh-operator/blob/main/config/profile/rhdh/default-config/flavours/lightspeed/configmap-files.yaml#L231 ... hence the user would not create this one, right @Jdubrick ?

this is one of the ones from you sync script, right @Jdubrick ?

Author: I've updated this section, @gabemontero.

> . Create the {ls-short} ConfigMap (`lightspeed-app-config`) for plugin configurations

Reviewer: I don't see any refs in the manifests or docs related to a `lightspeed-app-config` @Jdubrick @gazarenkov 

were there app-config.yaml changes needed for lightspeed I am forgetting?

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't be any changes to the app-config for Lightspeed specifically, only thing would be the addition of Notebooks but that is its own doc

> . Create the Llama Stack Secret (`llama-stack-secrets`) for LLM provider credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create the Lightspeed Secret (`lightspeed-secrets`) for LLM provider credentials, where the LLM is specified in the `lightspeed-stack` ConfigMap
```
this changed with https://github.com/redhat-developer/rhdh-operator/pull/2835/changes from @Jdubrick

> . Create the dynamic plugins ConfigMap with {ls-short} plugins enabled

Reviewer: the operator handles this as part of the lightspeed flavor being on by default, correct @gazarenkov @Jdubrick ?

again no need for the customer to create something here

. Create a {product-custom-resource-type} CR that references the ConfigMaps and Secrets you created:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ cat <<EOF | oc -n {my-product-namespace} create -f -
apiVersion: rhdh.redhat.com/v1alpha5
kind: {product-custom-resource-type}
metadata:
  name: <backstage_instance_name>
spec:
  application:
    appConfig:
      configMaps:

>         - name: lightspeed-app-config

Reviewer: if my comment above is correct, this configmap ref would go away

    extraEnvs:
      secrets:

>         - name: lightspeed-api-key

Reviewer: I don't think `lightspeed-api-key` is correct ... see https://github.com/redhat-developer/rhdh-operator/blob/main/examples/lightspeed.yaml#L33-L35

it should line up with what is listed at https://github.com/redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh/pull/2165/changes#r3268028826

wdyt @Jdubrick ?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, looks like changes were made

          containers:

>             - llama-stack

Reviewer: I think this needs to line up with https://github.com/redhat-developer/rhdh-operator/blob/main/examples/lightspeed.yaml#L35

correct @Jdubrick ?

Reviewer 2: Looks like changes were made

`lightspeed-secrets`:: The Secret name containing LLM provider credentials (created in step 1).
`containers: [lightspeed-core]`:: The target container for LLM provider credential injection.

. Wait for the Operator to reconcile the {product-custom-resource-type} CR:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ oc get backstage <backstage_instance_name> -n {my-product-namespace} -w
----
+
The deployment is ready when the `PHASE` column shows `Deployed`.

.Verification

. Verify that {ls-short} sidecar containers are running:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ oc get pods -n {my-product-namespace} -o jsonpath='{.items[*].spec.containers[*].name}' | tr ' ' '\n' | grep -E '(lightspeed|llama)'
----
+
You should see `lightspeed-core` and `llama-stack` containers.

. Access the {product} UI:
+
[source,terminal,subs="+attributes,+quotes"]
----
$ oc get route backstage-<backstage_instance_name> -n {my-product-namespace} -o jsonpath='{.spec.host}'
----
+
Navigate to the URL in your browser.

. Verify the {ls-short} chat interface appears in the {product} UI.
Look for the floating action button (FAB) in the bottom-right corner of the page.

> . Test the chat interface by asking a question about your software catalog, for example "What components are available in the catalog?"

Reviewer 2: This assumes MCP is present, which AFAIK, isn't shipping by default with Lightspeed @gabemontero @johnmcollier

Reviewer: that is my understanding as well
